isoformer
=========

Alternative isoform generator.

Intent
------

The programs here are all based on finding all possible alternative splicing
isoforms for a given sequence. This is a combinatoric problem and therefore
becomes computationally intractable for sequences longer than about 1000 bp.
There are a few heuristics that rein-in the combinations of splices.

+ canonical splice site - all introns follow the GT..AG rule
+ minimum exon length - by default 25
+ minimum intron length - by default 35
+ maximum number of splices - by default 3

In reality, a few percent of introns do not follow the GT..AG rule. Our
interest is in modeling the base, stochastic nature of splicing and then look
for outliers as examples of interesting splicing. Non-canonical splices already
fit into this category of "interesting".

Very few exons and introns are short. These too are indications of something
interesting and unusual. We plan to study them separately.

The maximum number of splice is a computational consideration. It's possible to
make many short-ish exons and introns. However, genes don't look like this, and
allowing 4 or more introns slows the algorithm down.

Programs
--------

+ `isoformer` generate all possible combinations of alternative splices
+ `isocounter` count all possible combinations of alternative splices
+ `isorandom` an experiment to count isoforms in random sequences

The main program is `isoformer`. This generates all possible isoforms. If given
models of splice donors, acceptors, exons, introns, and lengths, it will also
provide probabilities for each isoform. Each of these models can be weighted
separately if desired, and there is also an `--icost` parameter that imparts a
cost to splicing (this is somewhat analogous to a transition probability in an
HMM).

The number of isoforms generated by `isoformer` can be in the millions even for
relatively short sequences. For this reason, the program limits the number of
isoforms it reports with the `--limit` parameter.

If you want to use longer sequences, you can tell `isoformer` which splice
sites to consider by passing in a gff file with the `--introns` parameter.

If you only want to count the number of isoforms and not actually generate or
score them, use `isocounter`. The `isorandom` program runs an experiment where
it generates random sequences and outputs the number of isoforms. It's like
running `isocounter` in a loop with randomly generated sequences.
